.TH zns.segmap 8

.SH NAME
zns.segmap \- Map file extents to F2FS segments on ZNS devices. Running this tool on the mount directory will locate all file extents and show a summary of their mapping into F2FS segments, as well as their placement on the ZNS device.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zns.segmap
.B \-d [dir]
.I path to directory to be mapped
[
.B \-h
.I show help menu
]
[
.B \-l
.I set the logging level [1-2] (default 0)
]
[
.B \-p
.I resolve segment information from procfs (/proc/fs/f2fs/<device>/segment_info)
]
[
.B \-w 
.I show \fIFIEMAP\fP extent flags (Currently only during logging)
]
[
.B \-s
.I show mappings starting from this zone (Default 1)
]
[
.B \-e
.I show mappings up to this zone (Default to last zone)
]
[
.B \-z
.I show only mappings in this zone
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
takes extents of files and maps these to segments on the ZNS device. The aim being to locate data placement across segments, with fragmentation, as well as indicating good/bad hotness classification. The tool calls \fIioctl()\fP with \fiFIEMAP\fP on all files in a directory and maps these in LBA order to the segments on the device. Since there are thousands of segments, we recommend analyzing zones individually, for which the tool provides the option for, or depicting zone ranges. The directory to be mapped is typically the mount location of the file system, however any subdirectory of it can also be mapped, e.g., if there is particular interest for locating WAL files only for a database, such as with RocksDB.

.SH OPTIONS
.B \-d [dir] " path to directory to be mapped"
The path to the directory for which all files to be mapped are in. Can be file system mount directory, or any of its subdirectories.
.TP
.BI \-h " show help menu"
Show the help menu with flag and acronym information.
.TP
.BI \-l " set the logging level"
Set the logging level to show information duriong \fIioctl()\fP calls.
.TP
.BI \-p " resolve segment information from procfs"
Resolve segment information, including the segment type (hot/cold/warm data or node) and valid block count, from procfs (/proc/fs/f2fs/<device>/segment_info).
.TP
.BI \-w " show \fIFIEMAP\fP extent flags"
Show the flags returned by the \fIioctl()\fP call (Currently only during logging).
.TP
.BI \-s " show mappings starting from this zone"
With lots of output, show mappings only starting from this zone (Default: zone 1).
.TP
.BI \-e " show mappings up to this zone"
Similarly, show only mappings up to this particular zone (Default: last zone).
.TP
.BI \-z " show only mappings in this zone"
Decrease output further by only showing mappings for this particular zone.

.SH OUTPUT
.B zns.segmap
outputs which zones contain what extents and segments. For convenience we include zone information in the output, such as the starting and ending addresses, such that it is easier to understand if the file is occupying the entire zone or only parts. The important information is the range of the block addresses, which we depict with a start and ending address of the extent. The output contains several acronyms:
.TP

.BI LBAS
Logical Block Address Start (for the Zone)
.TP
.BI LBAE
Logical Block Address End (for the Zone, equal to LBAS + ZONE CAP)
.TP
.BI CAP
Zone Capacity (in 512B sectors)
.TP
.BI WP
Write Pointer of the Zone
.TP
.BI SIZE
Size of the Zone (in 512B sectors)
.TP
.BI STATE
State of a zone
.TP
.BI MASK
The Zone Mask that is used to calculate LBAS of LBA addresses in a zone
.TP
.BI EXTID
Extent number in the order of the extents returned by ioctl(), depciting logical file data ordering
.TP
.BI PBAS
Physical Block Address Start
.TP
.BI PBAE
Physical Block Address End 

.SH Limitations
F2FS utilizes all devices (zoned and conventional) as one address space, hence extent mappings return offsets in this range. This requires to subtract the conventional device size from offsets to get the location on the ZNS. Therefore, the utility only works with a single ZNS device currently, and relies on the address space being conventional followed by ZNS (which is how F2FS handles it anyways). 
.TP
Extents that are out of the address range for the ZNS device are not included in the statistics, which occurs when F2FS allocates space for files but has not written them. We show these with info prints if the logging level is set above the default of 0.


.SH AUTHORS
The code was written by Nick Tehrany <nicktehrany1@gmail.com>.

.SH AVAILABILITY
.B zns.segmap
is available from https://github.com/nicktehrany/zns-tools.git

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR zns.fiemap(8)
.TP
.BR zns.fsinfo(8)
.TP
.BR zns.fpbench(8)
